---
author: Sean Cavanaugh
date: 2020-02-10 00:00 UTC
description: This blog post covers job responsibilities of an NRE, the
  goal of Juniper's NRE Labs, and a quick overview of new exercises and
  the concepts Red Hat and Juniper are jointly demonstrating.
lang: en-us
title: Agnostic network automation examples with Ansible and NRE Labs
---

# Agnostic network automation examples with Ansible and NRE Labs

On February 10th, The NRE Labs project launched four Ansible Network
Automation exercises, made possible by Red Hat and Juniper Networks. 
This blog post covers job responsibilities of an NRE, the goal of NRE
Labs, and a quick overview of new exercises and the concepts Red Hat and
Juniper are jointly demonstrating.  The intended audience for these
initial exercises is someone new to Ansible Network Automation with
limited experience with Ansible and network automation. The initial
network topology for these exercises covers Ansible automating Juniper
Junos OS and Cumulus VX virtual network instances.

# About NRE Labs

Juniper has defined an NRE or [network reliability engineer](https://www.juniper.net/us/en/products-services/what-is/nre/),
as someone that can help an organization with modern network
automation.  This concept has many different names including DevOps for
networks, NetDevOps, or simply just network automation.  Juniper and Red
Hat realized that this skill set is new to many traditional network
engineers and worked together to create online exercises to help folks
get started with Ansible Network Automation.  Specifically, Juniper
worked with us through NRE Labs, a project they started and co-sponsor
that offers a no-strings-attached, community-centered initiative to
bring the skills of automation within reach for everyone. This works
through short, simple exercises within your browser.  You can find NRE
Labs at the following location:
[https://nrelabs.io](https://nrelabs.io/)

With Red Hat Ansible Engine 2.9 we introduced the concept of resource modules
and native fact gathering, so I wanted to make sure that these exercises
covered the latest and greatest aspects of Ansible Network Automation to
make this turn key for network engineers.  If you are new to resource
modules, native fact gathering or even just the Juniper network platform
I think it is worth skimming through these exercises!

Lets begin with a network diagram:

![NRE diagram](/images/posts/archive/NRE_diagram.png)

Each of the four exercises has a different set of objectives outlined,
step-by-step instructions and takeaways for your Ansible knowledge.


[Exercise 1](https://go.nrelabs.io/labs/?lessonSlug=ansible-network-automation&lessonStage=0)

This exercise covers what an Ansible INI-based inventory looks like, the
Ansible configuration file (ansible.cfg) and running an Ansible Playbook
for enabling NETCONF on Juniper Junos.  This exercise also illustrates
the concept of idempotency and why it is important for network
automation.


[Exercise 2](https://go.nrelabs.io/labs/?lessonSlug=ansible-network-automation&lessonStage=1) - Facts

This exercise covers native fact gathering (using gather_facts: True)
and using the debug module.  We show how to quickly print serial numbers
and version numbers to the terminal window using just three tasks.


[Exercise 3](https://go.nrelabs.io/labs/?lessonSlug=ansible-network-automation&lessonStage=2) - Resource Facts

This exercise covers more in depth fact gathering using the junos_facts
module in conjunction with the new gather_network_resources parameter. 
This allows the junos_facts module to gather facts from any resource
module to read in network configurations and store them as YAML/JSON. 
This exercise also covers converting these facts into a structured YAML
file.

[Exercise 4](https://go.nrelabs.io/labs/?lessonSlug=ansible-network-automation&lessonStage=3) - Network Configuration Templates

This exercise covers using and understanding host variables, using
simple Jinja2 templating, using the junos_config module for Juniper
Junos and the template module for Cumulus Linux.  The overarching goal
of this exercise is using Ansible Network Automation to create an OSPF
adjacency between the Cumulus VX device cvx11 and the Juniper Junos
device vqfx1.
