---
author: Elle Universal
date: 2022-10-24 00:00 UTC
description: Catch up on what you missed at AnsibleFest 2022.
lang: en-us
title: Best of Fest 2022
---

# Best of Fest 2022

At AnsibleFest 2022, the power of automation was on full display.
Through sessions, workshops, labs and more, we explored how to transform
enterprise and industry through automation. There were a lot of exciting
[announcements](https://www.redhat.com/en/about/ansiblefest-newsroom)
made on both days, and in case you missed it, we are going to dive into
what is new!

# Ansible and AWS

We are thrilled to also announce a new AWS Marketplace offering, Red Hat
Ansible Automation Platform. By offering Ansible Automation Platform as
a pre-integrated service that can be quickly deployed from cloud
marketplaces, we are meeting our customers where they are, while giving
them the flexibility to deliver any application, anywhere, without
additional overhead or complexity. Whether you are automating your
hybrid cloud or multi-cloud environments, Ansible Automation Platform
acts as a single platform. This platform provides consistency,
visibility, and control to help  you manage these environments at scale.
Ansible is the IT automation "glue" for bringing your cloud, network,
bare-metal and cloud-native infrastructure together. This  provides the
functionality to coordinate and manage across  hybrid cloud environments
in a simple and efficient way. Interested in learning more? Check out
the [press release](http://www.redhat.com/en/about/press-releases/red-hat-introduces-red-hat-ansible-automation-platform-aws-marketplace).

# Automation at the Edge

Ansible Automation Platform provides a framework for building and
operating IT automation at scale. What this means for edge, much like
the data center, is that users across an entire organization can create,
share, and manage automation. They can develop and apply guidelines for 
using automation within individual groups. They can write tasks that use
existing knowledge so they can be leveraged by nonIT staff, allowing
end-to-end automation to be deployed. Ansible Automation Platform uses
containerization to package, distribute, and execute automation across
environments securely via automation execution environments. This
enables organizations to rapidly and consistently extend IT services to
the edge, while maintaining a focus on security. This helps
organizations to simplify capacity scaling, increase resiliency, and
improve consistency. Learn more about automation at the edge
[here.](http://ansible.com/use-cases/edge)

# Event-Driven Ansible

Event-Driven Ansible is a new capability that we're making available to
the entire Ansible open source community in developer preview. With
Event-Driven Ansible, you can eliminate low-level tasks from the
day-to-day routine so you have more time to focus on innovations. This
means a happier, more productive, and more engaged team. It is fast,
accurate, and will free you (and your teams) to work on the things you
WANT to be doing, without being dragged down by all the things you HAVE
to do. Event--Driven Ansible will support a range of use cases, and here
are few good ones to get started with:

-   Automating remediation of common problems, like resetting a network router that's out.
-   Gathering information to solve problems faster, like information about a server configuration or buffer pool size so when you get the service ticket, the information you need is already there.
-   Administering user requests ... like "I can't log in" or "I cannot access the application".

We are excited about the future of automation and what is possible with
Event-Driven Ansible.

# Project Wisdom

[Project Wisdom](http://www.redhat.com/en/about/press-releases/red-hat-and-ibm-research-advance-it-automation-ai-powered-capabilities-ansible)
is a Red Hat initiative, developed in close collaboration with IBM
Research, to give Ansible artificial intelligence superpowers. The first
goal is to bring together automation novices and Ansible experts while
enabling new automators to drastically reduce the challenge of learning
and mastering Ansible. The first capability we are using AI for is
content generation. The AI models we use underneath Project Wisdom are
able to generate Ansible Playbooks or roles that are both syntactically
correct and functional. You can also head to redhat.com/wisdom for more
information on how to get involved. 

# Ansible Automation Platform 2

Ansible Automation Platform 2 is built to enable a trusted automation
supply chain. In the upcoming  Ansible Automation Platform 2.3 release,
digital signing will be supported for containers, playbooks and
collections. We're also excited to introduce
Ansible validated content, which
complements the  existing  ecosystem of Red Hat Ansible Certified
Content Collections. Ansible validated content helps your teams to start
automating faster by following a trusted, expert-led, opinionated path
for performing operations and tasks on both Red Hat and third party
platforms. Initially, Ansible validated content will be pre-loaded into
private automation hub.

## Community

We are so fortunate that we are a part of one of the largest, most
vibrant open source project communities in the world. So while the
landscape may be shifting around us, Ansible continues to push forward
and evolve with the times. Ansible is celebrating its 10th anniversary
this year! Within our expansive community, the new Working Groups focus
on expanding the Ansible ecosystem with the development of Ansible
Content Collections. First spun up by our team last year, Matrix has
made a huge difference in our ability to connect and engage with the
Ansible community. So far we've spun up 32 unique chat rooms, with 4200+
members and nearly 80k messages sent in the past 6 months. Matrix's
ability to bridge with IRC gave us a strong foundation upon which to
build. Join the Working Groups and become a part of the conversation:
[https://matrix.to/#/#social:ansible.com](https://matrix.to/#/#social:ansible.com)
