---
author: Nelson Hsu
date: 2021-11-02 00:00 UTC
description: The recent announcement of Red Hat Ansible Automation
  Platform 2 aligns to this blossoming hybrid cloud model, where
  automation meets the modern hybrid cloud environment.
lang: en-us
title: AnsibleFest 2021, What it means for Partners
---

# AnsibleFest 2021, What it means for Partners

As the weather turns to Fall, the seasons seem to parallel that of the
technology cycles. Over the past couple of decades, we have seen various
transformations within the high-tech area:

-   From mainframe to distributed computing to hybrid cloud and now edge
-   From databases to data warehouse to advanced analytics and machine learning
-   From the challenges of storing a gigabyte of data, now grown to storing zetabytes+ of data per day.

All of this has moved businesses forward, driving great innovation. When
it comes to infrastructure, nothing is more impactful than a core
architectural update that fundamentally changes the way enterprises
drive their business.  Distributed computing, distributed architectures
like cloud, hybrid cloud and edge computing reinforce this  premise in
the era of hybrid cloud computing.

The recent announcement of Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform 2 aligns
to this blossoming hybrid cloud model, where automation meets the modern
hybrid cloud environment.  This represents a great opportunity for our
[Red Hat Ansible Partner Ecosystem](https://connect.redhat.com/user/register/lookup).

## AnsibleFest Announcements - Key Partner Takeaways

Red Hat recently held
[AnsibleFest](https://events.ansiblefest.redhat.com/widget/redhat/ansible21/sessioncatalog)
2021 which included some fantastic content that is still available on
demand. I would like to highlight some of  the exciting AnsibleFest news
and announcements that are key for Red Hat Ansible partners.  

Much has been written by Red Hat colleagues to highlight all of the
game-changing features that leverage the new hybrid cloud-ready
architecture, and you will find links below to learn more.  With  new
features like Automation controller and Automation execution
environments, new opportunities abound for our partners to grow with
us.  By separating the control layer (Automation controller) from the
execution layer (Automation execution environments), the scalability of
Ansible Automation Platform environments enables customers to grow
regardless of the computing paradigm they employ - from mainframe to
hybrid cloud to the edge. This is the value of this new release of
Ansible Automation Platform which can address all of these environments
using a single automation tool within a specific deployment model or
across all of these modes (this is reinforced later when we
discuss the value to Edge in more detail).

Our focus has been to drive a culture of automation with a consistent
experience across different roles (e.g., creators, operators, admins and
architects) and enterprise IT domains (network, security,
infrastructure, DevOps, cloud etc.).   This means you and our mutual
customers can drive greater efficiencies and automate at scale from
on-premises to hybrid cloud to Edge,with the same experience
throughout.  Applications and infrastructure built to run on a
variety of platforms and solutions can be automated faster with over 100
[Ansible Certified Collections](https://connect.redhat.com/en/partner-with-us/red-hat-ansible-automation-certification),
allowing you as our partner to bring greater value to our mutual
customers.   For example, you can use these certified collections and
scale to greater levels with Ansible Automation Platform 2 to automate
functions on F5 networks or automate identity management functions built
on Fortinet.   

The Edge presents a great new opportunity for all, but it also
introduces challenges of scale with new vectors of vulnerability. With
the control plane separated from the execution plane, you can scale
those near and far edge devices.  Network edge mis-configurations can
abound exponentially, but with Automation controller you can maintain
network governance with automation all the way to  the Edge.  Think
about the number of near edge servers or IoT far edge devices where
firewalls come under attack. Automation execution environments allow
teams to package Ansible into containerized environments for a defined,
standardized, and portable set of automation resources that can work
near edge or at the edge. This allows customers to further
scale automation with network and security
automation to thwart attacks by managing each edge server or device,
such as applying new patches and securing the Edge.

Customers can continue to leverage the great solutions from the Ansible
Automation Platform ecosystem to drive scalability  by using existing
playbooks and further expanding them on their journey to automation
maturity.

## DevOps, the Evolution of Automation - "Shift Left"

When it comes to automation, we are in the midst of an evolution of
DevOps, DevSecOps and Infrastructure as Code. Red Hat Ansible Automation
Platform 2 has evolved to new heights by "shifting left" and developing
more agility for enterprise applications and workloads with the new
architecture and tools like ansible-builder and ansible-navigator. 
Developers can now control their environments and leverage Ansible
Automation Platform as their operations counterparts have.  With these
new tools, developers can easily write, test, distribute and manage
automation and deliver it all as they have for content creation. We
immediately impact developer productivity and agility; which is then
multiplied by the great complementary solutions from you, our partners. 

Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform stands out in the market due to its
ability to   deliver greater time to value for customers and partners of
course increasing the value overall when paired with our partners'
certified [Content Collections](https://connect.redhat.com/en/partner-with-us/red-hat-ansible-automation-certification?hsLang=en-us). 
This enables our partners to fully participate in the automation journey
as joint customers "Create, Manage and Scale" their automation from
network to security to workloads like SAP and ITSM workflows with
ServiceNow.  I urge you to listen to the AnsibleFest customer
presentations from Discover Financial Services, JPMC and a major airline
as they highlight how your offerings work with Ansible Automation
Platform and explain how they are taking automation to new heights. Of
course, while you are there be sure to take in all the great Ansible
content from partners, customers and the community.

Here's a great note from IDC providing keen insight to the effect of
Automation on DevOps:

"IDC projects that more than 500 million new business applications will
be created by 2023. As these applications grow in scope and complexity,
developers and the IT operations and infrastructure teams that support
them will need to better manage and compress application delivery
cycles."

Jevin Jensen, Jim Mercer, IDC,  "AnsibleFest 2021: Ansible Automation
Platform 2 is re-architected for speed and ease of use", September
29,2021

A key takeaway is that it is the robust nature of Ansible and its time
to value has exponentially increased with this new architecture.  As
part of the [Ansible ecosystem](https://www.ansible.com/integrations),
you don't have to do significant additional work to participate in this
new flexible and scalable environment. Use Automation controller and
Automation execution environments to further deploy your solution. Red
Hat Ansible Automation Platform 2 is a win for all as we scale to new
heights.
