---
author: Eric Lavarde
date: 2022-06-09 00:00 UTC
description: This blog shows how automation, and more specifically Red
  Hat Ansible Automation Platform, can help bring some of the ITIL
  topics into the agile and automated bliss.
lang: en-us
title: Pump up your ITIL with Automation
---

# Pump up your ITIL with Automation

In the world of automation and agility, it seems that Information
Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) doesn't have a role to play
anymore, being marked as an "old school" framework. Can it be the end of
the methodology after it served numerous IT organizations for so long as
a guideline and blueprint for their processes?

This series of articles shows how automation, and more specifically Red
Hat Ansible Automation Platform and the principles of Infrastructure as
Code (IaC), can help bring some of the ITIL topics into the agile and
automated bliss:

-   [Configuration management](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/management/ansible/configuration-management)
-   Change and release management
-   Incident and problem management

So let's step into the topic of configuration management and what
everybody still knows as
[CMDB](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/management/ansible/configuration-management)
(Configuration Management Database) even if ITIL has since long titled
it as CMS (Configuration Management System). This name change was meant
to highlight the fact that the function can be fulfilled by a
combination of multiple databases and tools, but it won't matter here,
so we'll stick to the infamous CMDB term.

Do you love your CMDB? Probably not, according to my experience with
numerous customers. The data is generally outdated and wrong, considered
useless, which means that its maintenance is considered a chore. This
means that it's maintained with as little effort as possible, in a
careless manner, making it even less up-to-date, and in a downward
spiral you go.

To avoid the crash, we need first to understand that a CMDB and the
related Configuration management have two main purposes:

1.  Document the desired state of your environment - this is too often
    done manually, with the admins required to maintain the
    configuration once in the "real world" and once in the CMDB. To do
    this, companies often populate the CMDB from the discovery of the
    environment, which leads to a database that documents the current
    state. Note that there is no clarity if it corresponds to the
    desired state or not.
2.  Support the change management process by allowing an analysis of the
    environment, e.g. to validate that there is enough disk space free
    on each server before installing the new bloated software. Based on
    the noted lack of trust in the data quality, it is generally ignored
    as part of the process.

Looking at the above shortcoming, we need first to more clearly
structure our database, as it contains multiple kinds of data:

1.  Desired state data - this is information that comes from a service
    or change request and represents what one needs to have in one's
    environment.
2.  Actual state data - this is information discovered from the
    environment and representing its current state.

As data can be only desired, only actual or both, we have three
categories, which we'll reference with A to C for sake of simplicity:

![database category diagram](/images/posts/archive/database-category-diagram.png)

Because admins don't want to maintain the desired state twice, you use
the desired state in your CMDB (type A and B) as inventory source for
Ansible Automation Platform to configure your environment from it.
Admins know that the better the data in the CMDB, the better the result
in the real world, which leads to less work. That should be enough
motivation to quickly improve the data quality of your CMDB.

Because the CMDB doesn't mix-up desired state and actual state for the
data of category A, you can detect discrepancies, make a decision on how
to fix it, and use Ansible again for automated remediation. This should
help you quickly align reality with desired state, and have the right
data to make decisions.

The data of type C isn't of much use for automation, and is meant for
decision making in your change management process, though you could
decide to skip a patch cycle if the disks are too full. That said, you
shouldn't confuse this aspect with monitoring; monitoring a disk full
situation and correcting it quickly belongs to incident management, not
to configuration management.

Once you've reached this first stage, you can go to the next level and
use Ansible Automation Platform to automatically populate the desired
state in your CMDB.

![database population](/images/posts/archive/database-population-diagram.png)

Let's assume you have a service portal where customers can order new
services or modify and decommission them, using a service catalogue and
a dialog driving them through the choices they need to make. Using the
input variables grabbed through the dialog, the service portal can,
using the automation controller's API, trigger a workflow to fulfil the
service. One of the first steps of the workflow is then to enter those
input variables as desired state (type A and B) into the CMDB. It has
the advantage that, should the workflow job fail, you still have the
desired state documented and could trigger the action again once the
root cause for the failure has been fixed.

It would now be nice to have commit, branch and tag functions like in
Git to roll-back such changes easily. But perhaps someone will invent a
CMDB with such functionality based on this article. In the meantime,
connect Ansible Automation Platform to your CMDB and add value and
quality to your CMDB with automation.

[Learn more about using Ansible Automation Platform for configuration
management](https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/management/ansible/configuration-management)

## Take a video tour

[This eight-minute overview video](https://youtu.be/7GJjhZoYEus) highlights the components and
features found in the latest version of Ansible Automation
Platform---and how they come together to deliver a comprehensive
enterprise automation experience.

