---
author: Chris Short
date: 2018-08-14 00:00 UTC
description: The Total Economic Impact of Red Hat Ansible Tower is a Red
  Hat commissioned Forrester Consulting study. This post will dive into
  what Ansible Tower enables, the efficiencies gained, the acceleration
  of revenue recognition, and other tangible benefits.
lang: en-us
title: The Total Economic Impact of Red Hat Ansible Tower
---

# The Total Economic Impact of Red Hat Ansible Tower

[The Total Economic Impact of Red Hat Ansible Tower](https://www.redhat.com/en/resources/ansible-automation-forrester-total-ecomonic-impact-study)
is a Red Hat commissioned Forrester Consulting study published in June
2018. This study demonstrates the cost savings and business benefits
enabled by Ansible. Let's dive into the what Ansible Tower enables, the
efficiencies gained, the acceleration of revenue recognition, and other
tangible benefits.

## Faster Revenue Recognition

Revenue recognition is a critical aspect of business operations.
Quickening the pace of revenue recognition is something every
organization has their eye on. Forrester's TEI of Ansible Tower observed
a company cutting delivery lead times by 66%. Imagine the pace of
feature deployment an organization experiences when cutting lead times
from days to hours!

System reconfiguration times fell as well. Automating changes due to new
bugs or policy changes across systems helps mitigate the costly impact
of reconfiguration. This company found that the total time savings of
being able to reconfigure a fleet of systems through Ansible automation
reduced staff hours by 94% for this type of work.

The TEI also measured the security and compliance gains of Ansible
Tower. Ansible Tower reduced staff hours spent patching systems by 80%.
This also meant that patching systems could occur more often. This
helped reduce the number of known vulnerabilities in customer
environments at any given moment.

### Improving Security and Compliance

Ansible Tower also helps enable the adoption and automation of [CIS
Benchmarks](https://www.cisecurity.org/cis-benchmarks/) across systems.
CIS Benchmarks are, "guidelines for various technology groups to
safeguard systems against today's evolving cyber threats." This enabled
the customer interviewed for the study to navigate an ever changing
security landscape. Using trusted automation workflows that "maintain
the latest and greatest standards" created a more secure environment.

Additionally, the study found Ansible Tower reduced response times to
security incidents by 94%. When you consider something as impactful as
Heartbleed or WannaCry, being able to rapidly patch systems could
prevent a catastrophic impact to business continuity. Ansible Tower
helped enable GDPR compliance as well. The laborious tasks for patching
systems became significantly easier  thanks to Ansible Tower. "The
organization moved to a monthly patching cycle, increasing the frequency
of updates."  The best part, for the company surveyed, Red Hat Ansible
Tower enabled these security and compliance gains with no extra staff.

### Empower Staff to Do More

One of the key benefits observed in the TEI, was better staff
enablement. Not only were existing staff accomplishing more tasks in
less time but, junior staff could be empowered to take on higher level
tasks. Complex tasks could be delegated to greener team members. Ansible
Tower eliminated dull, boring, and repetitive tasks through automation.

Red Hat Ansible Tower's ease of use shined in this study. The lead
infrastructure architect said, "We had the ability for Tower to be used
within our environment in under a week with the tools provided out of
the box." Ansible Tower democratizes the flexibility and power of
Ansible. Infrastructure staff built functionality to enable end users to
act safely in their own environments. End users of Ansible Tower
functionality required only one hour of training to be qualified and
productive.

Hiring is an increasingly difficult task for IT organizations. The time
it takes to find and recruit talent, onboard, and train new hires comes
at a cost. The gains made by implementing Ansible Tower reduced the
urgency of onboarding more staff for this company. Forrester's TEI
indicated Red Hat's customer, "saved 48,000 hours of staff time by
automating the process of bringing servers online, stress testing
resources and deleting nodes." When assuming a typical, salaried US
employee's work hours to be 2,000 hours per year, implementing Ansible
Tower has a potential staff hours savings of eight full time employees
per year.

### No Expensive Hardware Needed

According to the TEI, "Rather than purchase name-brand appliances for
its data centers, the interviewed organization created an Ansible
Playbook and ran the automated functionality using generic Linux systems
Rather than purchase name-brand appliances for cloud configuration,
backups, etc. in its data centers, the customer stood up Ansible Tower
and ran the automated functionality using generic Linux systems." The
organization avoided purchasing 10 name brand infrastructure appliances,
representing a three-year present value of $389,707."

In conclusion, we believe that Red Hat Ansible Tower can enable
organizations to do what they've done successfully for years at scale.
Ansible Tower helps organizations accelerate revenue recognition.
Automation with Ansible can improve the safety and surety of IT
infrastructure by automating patching and compliance tasks. Ansible can
free up staff time and raise the capabilities of all staff to take part
in a greater velocity of improvements. What do you want to Ansible
today?
