---
author: Sean Cavanaugh
date: 2022-03-14 00:00 UTC
description: For this post, I am going to walk through two common
  scenarios where Ansible Automation Platform can help in public clouds.
lang: en-us
title: Two Simple Ways Automation Can Save You Money on Your AWS Bill
---

# Two Simple Ways Automation Can Save You Money on Your AWS Bill

Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform is an excellent automation and
orchestration tool for public clouds. For this post, I am going to walk
through two common scenarios where Ansible Automation Platform can help
out. I want to look outside the common public cloud use-case of
provisioning and deprovisioning resources and instead look at automating
common operational tasks.

![cloud engineer diagram](/images/posts/archive/cloud-engineer-diagram.png)

What is an operational task? It is simply anything that an administrator
has to do outside of creating and deleting cloud resources (e.g.
instances, networks, keys, etc.) to help maintain their company's
public cloud account. One of the problems I've encountered is instances
being left on, running up our public cloud bill in the background while
we were focusing our attention elsewhere. The more users you have, the
more likely problems are to occur; automation can help address these
issues and maintain control of your account. There are two common
scenarios I want to address here:

1.  Bespoke AWS instances were manually created for a one-off
    initiative, usually to test something, then instances were forgotten
    about and left running.
2.  Continuous Integration (CI) instances were spun up to test changes
    programmatically every time a Pull Request (PR) went into our
    project, and would sometimes hit a corner case where not everything
    was deprovisioned correctly (turned off).

In both cases, orphaned instances can be left on for a long time.
Imagine you spun up a couple dozen instances to test something on a
public cloud, then you got busy, lost track of time and forgot to
terminate the instances before stopping work for the day. That might be
16 hours (at minimum) of time when you were charged and received no
value out of the public cloud that your company was financing. Now
multiply this by dozens of users and that bill can end up in tens of
thousands of dollars really quickly.

## Use-case one: dealing with bespoke orphaned instances

So let's tackle each of these issues and use Ansible Automation
Platform to automate a solution for the first scenario above where
instances are being spun up outside any automation guard rails (i.e.
they are not using any automation tools, including Ansible, to spin up
cloud resources). We require everyone on my team who has access to the
public cloud account to tag their instances. They must create a key,
pair tag that says: `owner: person`

![inventory tags screenshot](/images/posts/archive/inventory-tags.png)

This creates a really easy way to audit and see who (which person,
organization, or team) is accountable for billing, which is half the
battle. I am going to write a very simple Ansible Playbook that will
enforce this. I will use the fully supported amazon.aws collection to
demonstrate this.  

-   **amazon.aws**
-   downstream content fully supported on [Ansible automation hub](https://cloud.redhat.com/ansible/automation-hub/repo/published/amazon/aws)
-   upstream code found on [Ansible Galaxy](https://galaxy.ansible.com/amazon/aws)

The primary difference between the community and supported Collections
here is support with your Red Hat subscription. There is also
significant integration testing, code auditing and Python 3 / boto3
support with the fully supported amazon.aws collection that is included
as part of your Red Hat subscription.

## Dealing with untagged instances

In my first Ansible Playbook, I want to get a list of all instances that
have no tags. First, let's retrieve all instances in a particular
region that are running:

```yaml
- name: grab info for un-tagged instances
  amazon.aws.ec2_instance_info:
    region: "{{ ec2_region }}"
    filters:
      instance-state-name: running
  register: ec2_node_info
```

I am using the ec2_instance_info module found in the AWS Collection,
part of the Amazon namespace. This task retrieves all instances
(regardless of tags). I found the easiest way was to grab everything
then filter out for empty tags:

```yaml
- name: set the untagged to a var
  set_fact:
    untagged_instances: "{{ ec2_node_info.instances | selectattr('tags', 'equalto', {}) | map(attribute='instance_id') | list }}"
```

This
[selectattr](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/complex_data_manipulation.html#data-manipulation)
filter is simply matching any instance that has no tags with the
`['tags', 'equalto', {} ]`

I can then simply terminate these since my colleague didn't follow my
well establish guidelines:

```yaml
- name: Terminate every un-tagged running instance in a region.
  amazon.aws.ec2:
    region: "{{ ec2_region }}"
    state: absent
    instance_ids: "{{ untagged_instances }}"
  when: untagged_instances | length  > 0
```

However, since you might be more forgiving than me, you could use
`state: stopped` versus
absent which will turn them off versus terminate them.

## Retrieving any instances with missing tags

To expand on the above, we don't just care about instances that are
untagged entirely (meaning there are no tags at all), but we are
specifically looking for the owner tag. I now want to retrieve any
instance that is missing the owner tag. I can use the exact same logic
as above but instead use the selectattr filter to look for undefined. 

```yaml
- name: set the missing tag to a var
  set_fact:
    missing_tag: "{{ ec2_node_info.instances | selectattr('tags.owner', 'undefined') | map(attribute='instance_id') | list }}"
```

I wanted to show both examples above to give a path to
operationalization. Implementing the above using Ansible Automation
Platform, your organization can now understand that they need to use
tags, or their instances will be turned off (or worse!). Going further,
the organization could use automation to enforce a particular tag to
assign ownership, or action on the instance will be taken. You could use
one or both of these previous examples.

## Use-case two: Dealing with automated instances

For my particular use-case I have a code repository that is
automatically tested. Our code is tested nightly, and everytime there is
a Pull Request (PR) into the code repository. The CI testing will
provision instances on AWS, configure the instances, run through
automated tests, then deprovision them. Sometimes the deprovisioning
step will not complete successfully, leaving orphaned hosts. One of the
common things I have noticed is that the instances are often found
partially turned off, where their tags are completely missing (removed)
but the instances are not actually off, so we are still getting billed.
The above Ansible Playbook in the previous example can catch that.

However another great test is to use a new uptime parameter.

```yaml
- name: grab info
  amazon.aws.ec2_instance_info:
    region: "{{ ec2_region }}"
    uptime: 121
    filters:
      instance-state-name: [ "running" ]
      "tag:ansible-workshops": true
  register: ec2_node_info
```

In this task there are two parameters I want to call out. First is the
uptime parameter (added in the 1.4.0 of amazon.aws), which will only
return instances that have run for more than that integer in minutes.
For this example it has to run for more than 121 minutes, or more than
two hours. I know that my CI testing should never take more than two
hours. Either the instance is stuck, my automated testing broke, or
deprovisioning didn't happen successfully.

The other tag here is simply a filter so that I only return instances
that are part of my automated testing (versus other initiatives). In
this example, it has to be a
[workshop](https://github.com/ansible/workshops). Now it should click
why I need the "no tagged" example at the beginning! This entire
operational task will fail if there is no tag at all. So the no tags
use-case overlaps with every other use case because of how important
tags can be in public cloud infrastructure. 

## Automating the automation

So this automation is great and all, but manually running playbooks only
saves you so much time. I went ahead and used the [Ansible workflows](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible-tower/latest/html/userguide/workflows.html)
feature to hit multiple regions at once, and then schedule it so that my
automation jobs run every hour.

![ansible workflow diagrams](/images/posts/archive/automating-automation.png)

Each rectangle on the right represents an automation
[job](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible-tower/latest/html/userguide/job_templates.html).
Each job in the same column is run in parallel on my Ansible Automation
Platform cluster. Each job template is set to a different region. I also
used the [survey feature](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible-tower/latest/html/userguide/job_templates.html#surveys)
to make this easy to configure from the Web UI.

![screenshot](/images/posts/archive/aws-untagged-instances.png)

In my particular scenario I was running automated testing in four AWS
regions (us-east-1, ap-northeast-1, ap-southeast-1 and eu-central-1).
Now that my workflow is complete, it is trivial to schedule my workflow
to run every hour.

![screenshot](/images/posts/archive/schedule-details-ui.png)

Voila! Now I have automated testing behind the scenes to make sure that
no orphaned instances are running. For my particular use case this will
save a lot of money, and force a culture of accountability around public
cloud use so that costs are clear and transparent between team
members.  
